♪ [music] ♪
So we looked at different ways to
send data to the browser via send,
in JSON, and whatnot,
but the one that we're going to
be using quite a bit when we're not
dealing with API endpoints is something
called res.render. So response.render.
And what that will do is it's going to
render out a template for us. So this
video's going to be all about learning how
to use our templating language
called Pug. Now, first things first,
Pug is a templating language that
is very popular in the node community.
It used to be called Jade. So if you're
ever looking for help on this stuff, it
could be helpful to search for Jade. I
think they switched the name over because
of some legal reason. So Jade is our
templating engine and you can look in
app.js on around line 20 and 21. And what
that's going to show you is that, first of
all, we have what's called a views folder.
And the views folder is where all of our
Pug files are going to live. So anytime
we need to create a template,
that goes inside of our views folder
and that's determined right here.
Next we set our view engine to be Pug.
However, there are other alternatives if
you do not prefer. Pug is based on
indentation, which some people absolutely
love. Some people just can't deal with
it at all. So there's other templating
engines called Mustache in EJS
if you prefer either of those as well.
You could even do this entire tutorial in
a different templating engine if you
already know that. You would just
switch that out here at that moment.
Now, that's fine, so we can close down
app.js. Then we go to our...let's go to
our first route here, router.get/. How
we can then render out a template,
is not request response at JSON, but
it's response.render. And response.render
is going to take two things. First, it
needs a name of a template to render out.
So we need to make one. So let's go to
our views directory here and I'm going to
make a new file. Let's just call that
hello.pug, and then we can write inside of
Pug. Now, we're going to go over
all the different pieces of Pug
but let's just get it working. And how Pug
works is that you do not give yourself
tags like an open paragraph, close
paragraph, hello, close it. You simply
just give it the opening tag that you wish
to have and then you type your content
inside of it. So we'll go over it a
little bit more but that's our very basic
getting set up. So we want to render out
the hello template. You don't need to put
a .pug on the end, so it's just hello. And
then the second thing we pass is local
variables, some information that it
needs. So right now let's just go without
those. We'll render out hello.pug.
So let's go back to our application,
get that working, and you should see
hello being rendered out to the page.
Okay. That seems simple enough. We've
got our hello.pug, it's going to be turned
into regular HTML. If you inspect it, you
can see exactly what's going on here.
We've got a paragraph tag. And then the
HTML, the head, the body, all of that
stuff is just there. Because if the
browser does not receive any of it,
it will insert it in there for us.
So let's go through some of
our basics when dealing with Pug.
First thing that we need to know is that
you have a tag, a space, and then you have
all of your elements inside of it.
If you wish to nest your elements,
like let's say you have a div and
inside of that you want a paragraph,
you need to indent it one level. And this
is really important because, I know that
some people, when they're first getting
started with coding, they're a little bit
sloppy with their indentation practices.
And this going to force you to get really
good at your indentation. So first thing
you need to do is to pick your indentation
standard. I use two spaces, you
might use four, you might use tabs,
it doesn't matter as long as you pick one
and do not ever stray from it for this
entire project. So I'm using two spaces,
you can see in my editor I've set that up.
and then you simply just nest it
inside of it. So I have a div and I have
a paragraph, and maybe inside of that I
want a span with "Yo." You add a save.
Now when I refresh. You can inspect this
and you can see that we've got all of our
different elements here. Close that sucker
down. There we go. We got a div, we got
a paragraph, we got a span.
They will be turned on over.
Now, what if we want classes on it, like a
wrapper? So we can say div.wrapper.
And if you want a class on the paragraph
with "hello." And then if you want an ID,
you use #, just like CSS, selectors
will be, put "yo." Out of that. Refresh.
You see a div with a class of wrapper,
class of hello, ID. You have multiple
".ohonoooo." It will give both of
those classes as you need. So you can
dot, dot, and #. Another hot
tip is if it's just a div, it's assumed.
So you do not need, you can
simply just type .wrapper in front of it
and it will always give you a div. So if
you leave the element type out,
it will assume that it is always a div.
And then we also need to know about
attributes. So let's say I have an image
tag here. How do I give it a source?
Well, you use parentheses here, and then
you can give it all of your attributes
that you need. So src="dog.jpg," and
then you'd do a space, which is alt="Dog."
Got to save. And then here, image
source, it goes alt. I believe you
can also do commas in it, if you prefer
that. Yep. That will work just fine.
So if you prefer to do a comma, but I like
to keep my syntax as minimal as possible.
And you can, of course, mix that with a
dog class and have a source in there.
So, class of dog, a source of
dog, .jpeg and alt of dog in there.
What else do we need to learn?
Obviously, have all of your h-2 tags,
"hello," all of your headings, all
of your HTML works just the same.
But if you ever need to nest something
inside of another element, you can do
that. Maybe if you have a "hello"
there, and then a span that says,
"How are you?" with maybe emphasis
inside of that, that will work just fine.
Although, if that bugs you a little bit,
and you wish to put the "hello" and the
"How are you?" on their own line, what you
can do is you can put it on its own line,
but now what's going to happen
if I save that, open up the h-2,
you'll see that we get a "hello" tag,
which is not what you want.
So, like, how would you just put the
content? Well, you pipe space and that
will give you the actual. So the Pug
and the jdocs are really good at telling
you what is the equivalent.
It's a little bit of a learning curve,
to understand, but we're going to be
learning how we do all of the different
pieces. We're going to be looking at how
do you do looping inside of here, how do
you do logic, how do you do advanced
templating, how do you do mix-ins.
There's a whole bunch that we can do and
we're going to learn it as we go along.
But for now, what you need to know is how
we create elements and nest them inside
of each other. The other thing I want to
tell you is how do you get information
from your route, which will come from,
maybe from a database that we're going to
do, or it comes from your URL, how do you
get that information to your actual
template? So the way that you do that is
you have to pass it when you render.
So we pass it in object here, and then
that object will contain all of the
information that we have. So maybe we
say name is Wes, and dog is Snickers.
Then you go into here, "Hello, how are
you?" And we can reference those variables
inside of it. So let's say, "Hello, my
dog's name is." Now how do we reference
it? You do #, curly brackets, and that's
how you interpolate a variable inside of
text in Pug. And you can simply just say
what the name was. So let's say dog.
Then, "Hello, my dog's name is
Snickers," and you could make that a
little bit dynamic. Where you could do
query mark, dog= with Hugo,
and we could make that dynamic by
saying the dog's is...  how, you tell me.
Request.query.dog. So my dog's name is
Hugo, Snickers, Wes, you see how it's
pulling it in, passing it along to the
templating. So whenever you need to
get information over to your template,
these are called local variables,
or locals as they're often called, in
EXPRESS land, that's how we pass it along.
And we can do things like dog. Another
thing that we need to know is let's say we
wanted to put the dog's name in the alt
tag. Previously, in Jade, what you would
do is you would do a # like that, and you
would say dog. But it actually doesn't
work. You'll see that it actually just
writes the word. So how do you put
variables into attributes?
This is how you put variables into text.
But they've taken away the ability to put
variables into attributes unless you just
use JavaScript. So how do you do that
in JavaScript? Well, you use back ticks
instead, and then you use ESX template
literals, which is a $ curly brackets
instead of #. And then that will pass
along the dog's name into the alt of the
actual image. So that's a little bit
funky, because you have to remember that
when you're writing text it's #, but
when you're trying to do an attribute,
you have to use back ticks and
a $. So it's a bit unfortunate,
but that's just the way it is, and it
doesn't look like it's going to be
changed. So not the biggest deal in the
world because you can learn these things
pretty quickly. Another thing that you
need to know is that you can run any
JavaScript inside of this. So if you
needed to make a quick variable,
ideally you'd do all the work in here,
but if you do need to make a variable, you
can just use a minus sign, const upDog =
dog.toUpperCase. And then we can use
our updog variable in there, no
problem, and it will uppercase it for us.
Similarly, we can also dog.toUpperCase,
and that will do exactly the same thing.
So you can run JavaScript, and that's
really why I like using Pug a lot, because
it's JavaScript-based, and any
time you need to run some quick
JavaScript, whether it's to filter
something or whether it's to run a quick
uppercase or to split a string, then you
can also do that logic right inside of
your template. So we're going to be
looking deeper at some of those
self-looping logic mix-ins, if statements,
all that stuff, as we go ahead.
But that's the very basics of
understanding our Pug. So this is all
great, but chances are that you want to
chunk your website into different pieces
like a header and a footer and a body tag,
and you want to reuse parts of your
website over and over again. So how we
actually do that is we extend templates,
and we sort of create like what I like to
call layouts. And then you leave little
holes in your layouts for the footer and
for the body content and whatnot,
and we just pass that in. Because right
now, we don't have our...I've got to do an
exclamation mark tab. And by the way,
that little thing, that's Emmet, if you're
ever wondering. Emmet works just fine in
Jade as well. So you can do things like
ul.dogs>li.dog.dog$$, then hit tab, and
give ten of them. That will give you all
of it. So that's Emmet, if you need it up
and running, we've used it in most of my
other courses. I recommend that
you get it for writing Pug as well.
But how do you get like the HTML tag in
all that? So if we go into our views
directory, and we open up layout.pug,
you'll see that I've actually set you up
with our base HTML. So we have
doc type HTML, here's our HTML tag,
we've got our head, and we have a title
tag, which means you should pass it a
title, and we also have a helpers,
I'll go into that in a second.
Link up our style at CSS, we're going to
link up our donut for the fav icon.
We have our body tag, which inside of it
will include what's called a block.
And a block is sort of like a section of
your website that can be filled in by
another template. And so we have our
header here, and then we put the content
that we wish for it to show if nothing
gets passed in. So by default you probably
aren't going to pass a custom header.
So we're going run this header,
and this may look like a little bit messy,
it may look like a lot right now.
We will go into understanding all of this
in the future, don't worry all that much.
But if you scroll down, all the way down,
all the way down, to where we say
.content, block content, so we
have a div with a class of content,
and that's where our blocked content goes.
What we can then do is go back to our
"hello" here. And we can, let's just
delete absolutely everything that we have
in there. We want to extend this layout,
we want to like use all of this layout and
then we just want to put our content in
this one little piece that we have right
here. So that's what we can do, we can say
"extends layout" and that will extend the
layout, and then you go ahead
and type all of your blocks.
So we have block content, and inside of
the content block is now where we type
everything we want for it to put into
this block right here. So if I say
"p hello," what it's going to do is
it's going to take the paragraph and
replace this with "p hello" for us.
I'll give that a save and refresh.
And now you're going to see, whoa, now
we've got all of our website showing up.
We've got this header that I've already
done for you being clicked in.
And the "hello" is the only thing that
we've done here. We could also make a
block header and pass in a custom header,
like h1 "yo," and what that will do is
it will replace, because you'll see in our
layout.pug we have a block header,
and then we also have content in front of
that. So this will be the default header
that we have here. However, if you
ever are in a Pug file and you wish to
overwrite the default that you have there,
you can just specify the block header and
that will, instead of using
the default one that we have here,
it will replace it with whatever it is
that you have passed inside of there.
So you can also do that with our content
here. You could say like "p this is the
default," and if I do not pass anything,
this is the default, but if we go back to
content here and pass in "hello," now we
start to see hello. So that's what we're
going to be doing with all of our
templates. We're going to be
extending the layout. This is
sort of our overall layout for the
entire website. So it's not like a
WordPress where you have a page where you
pull in the pieces that you want,
it's more like you grab your layout,
and then you pass it the data that you
want, and the pieces that you wish to
override. So I don't have a footer here,
but if I wanted to, I would simply just
add in a footer element here, and we'd say
block footer, and then I would say like
something like copyright Wes Bos,
and I'll see what that does. So it
shows up, because I've put it in my
layout.pug. However, I'd be able to then
go in here and give ourselves a new block
called footer, and maybe I'll want to do
something funny like "p I love you," and
that's going to overwrite the default that
we've got in there. So hopefully that
makes sense, we'll be going over that a
lot more as we go along. But know that
your layout is your overall page layout
and your Pug files are simply going to
extend that layout by typing extend
layout. So we sort of use that layout.
And you can feather them in many levels,
but generally I just have one layout for
my front end, I have one layout if I have
like a custom back end that is totally
different, and then I just plop in
my content blocks as I need them.
♪ [music] ♪